Hello and welcome to another walkthrough for computer architecture for everybody. We're continuing on our
CDC 6504 emulator and now we're going to load our most complex sample. So let's take a look at its assembly language
Here we have it and let's move it over here and let's move it up
So we see all of the instructions. There we go. We can just barely see all the instructions
This is our first thing that's so long that we're gonna end up in the second column of the instructions
So to start at what we've got here, we got a data pseudo operation that fills the data memory with the string
Hello, H-E-L-L-O with H being uppercase already and E-L-L-O. When we're done
We want all these characters to be uppercase and so we're gonna write a loop
That's going to go through from zero until it's and it's gonna stop at a zero byte and it's gonna load the value check
If it's already uppercase if it's not it's gonna subtract 20 to it
Which we did before because that's the mapping between uppercase and lowercase and we're gonna store it back in so we're done
48 won't change because that's already uppercase 65 will become 45 a 6c will become 4c, etc
And then it'll stop and it'll print out the uppercase
So this is just kind of like a an uppercase method in Python or whatever
Okay, so let's take a look at the code
We have a top of a loop and we have a jump to the top of the loop at the bottom
We're using X as our iteration variable X because we have this really cool load that says I want to load from zero
Offset by the current value in X
Okay, so X is gonna start at zero because we're gonna clear it and then we're gonna slowly but surely add X
So this is like X equals X plus 1 each time through the loop
So this is the bottom of the loop kind of the continue area where we're saying X plus plus or X equals X plus 1 to
Advance X through the string because we're gonna use X as the array offset as it's going through our little array
we're gonna load the value offset by X and
Then we're gonna immediately check to see if we got a zero byte and that's how we terminate this loop
When we hit a zero byte, so we only want to go through memory until we hit a zero byte
Okay, so we don't want to run out of memory or blow up or run into something else
We stop at a zero byte and then we're gonna check to see if the letter we just got is already uppercase
If it is that means it's less than lowercase a that's how ASCII works, right?
So let me go ahead and show you the ASCII stuff
The lowercase characters are higher by a factor of 20 hex
So a lowercase a is 61 and uppercase a is
41 you subtract 0 X 20 to get from lowercase to upper and our code is going to upper
so we're checking to see if
We are above or below lowercase a if we're below lowercase a already
we're gonna do a branch minus down here and then increment to go to the next one if on the other hand we are
Above the letter a then we're going to subtract 20 and then we're gonna store that using our index again as X
So X is really cool. It's just gonna be our counter
And so this register is kind of like the iteration variable. Well, it is the iteration variable of our loop
So let's go ahead and get started. So I'll turn on narration of execution line ourselves up here
Take a first step clear the X register
So now we're at the top of the loop and we're gonna do a load from memory location 0
Offset by X register. The X register is actually part of this instruction. Okay, so let's go ahead and load that
X
Okay, so now you see that the accumulator is 0 X 4 8 and that is the uppercase hello and that load
Set the Z flag in the end flag and it's neither 0 nor negative
And so let's go ahead and run the if test to see if we're done with the loop
Now 0 X 1 0 would have been this exit of the loop but it didn't because we're not we're not minus yet
and so that's our top tested loop and now we're gonna do is we're gonna say if
this is
Greater than a if it's less than a we're gonna skip these next two lines and the next two lines are a subtract of 0 X
20 and then an indexed store into memory locations 0 offset by X but X is still position 0
So this is the letter H and it is already uppercase. So we're gonna skip around this subtraction calculation
And now we're gonna branch because it is n so we're gonna branch if minus and that means we're already uppercase
So it went to 0 X 0 D which skipped around the subtraction and now we're at the kind of continue or the loop bottom the
Increment part of the loop and we're gonna add 1 to X
PC 0 X 0 D
increment X register PC 0 X 0 E
Jump to address one. Oh
I it went and did it automatically so we went up to the top of the loop and I didn't catch it fast enough
So it already went and X is now 1 so it's loading memory location 1 into the accumulator
Okay, and so the accumulator now is non zero. So we're we're gonna check to see if the loop is done
PC 0 X 0 3 branch if equal address 0 X 1 0
And it didn't so now we're gonna check to see the case of our current character PC 0 X 0 5
Comparative we later will immediate 0 X 6 1 so that is checking to see if it's above or below a and this one is
Above a and so we're gonna have to map it into uppercase
So you'll notice that this BMI does not jump to the co NT label this one falls through PC 0 X 0 7
Branch if minus address 0 X 0 D
So now we're at 0 X 0 9 not 0 X 0 D and now we're gonna do the subtract of 20
And then we're going to store it into the memory
PC 0 X 0 9 subtract will carry immediate 0 X 2 0 and now we're going to store it
PC 0 X 0 B
Store accumulator to address 0 index with X so now in location 1 we took this 45
That was our calculated uppercase character, and now it has been stored in
position 1
and so the next thing we do is add one and then
Jump to the top of the loop PC 0 X 0 D
increment X register
PC 0 X 0 E
Jump to address 1 so now we're at the top of the loop
We're gonna grab the next character because X is now 2 so we're gonna grab the 2 offset from our array
PC 0 X 0 1 load the accumulator from address 0 index with X so we got 60
So I'm gonna just run this a bit okay
Now try to stop it so I can show you kind of the last iteration of the loop so we'll watch X
I'll probably try to catch it while X sub the fourth iteration the well the fifth iteration
But sub 4 is running. Let's see if I can start it and then catch it
PC 0 X 0 3
Branch if equal address 0 X 1 0 PC 0 X 0 5 compare a accumulator with immediate 0 X
6 1 PC 0 X 0 7
Branch if minus address 0 X 0 D
We're on a series of things that have to be converted to uppercase now PC 0 X 0 B
Store accumulator to address 0 index with X PC 0 X 0 D
Increment X register PC 0 X 0 E
Jump to address 1 PC 0 X 0 1 load the accumulator from address 0 index with X
PC 0 X 0 3
Branch if equal address 0 X 1 0 PC 0 X 0 5
Compare a accumulator with immediate 0 X 6 1 PC 0 X 0 7
Branch if minus address 0 X 0 D PC 0 X 0 9
Subtract with carry immediate 0 X 2 0 PC 0 X 0 B
Store accumulator to address 0 index with X PC 0 X 0 D
Increment X register PC 0 X 0 E
Jump to address 1 PC 0 X 0 1
Load the accumulator from address 0 index with X PC 0 X 0 3
Branch if equal address 0 X 1 0 PC 0 X 0 5
Compare a accumulator with immediate 0 X 6 1 PC 0 X 0 7
Branch if minus address 0 X 0 D PC 0 X 0
Okay, so I kind of stopped it. So where are we at here?
We're about to store this last character. We got it subtracted
So it's now uppercase and we're about to store it into position offset by X our iteration variable is 4
PC 0 X 0 B
Store accumulator to address 0 index with X
The next thing we're going to do is increment X and so X is going to become 5 PC 0 X 0 D
increment X register
And now we're going to jump to the top of the loop PC 0 X 0 E
Jump to address 1. So now we're at the top of the loop
So X is 5 and we're going to load the character at offset 5 and so now you'll notice as soon as we do this
Accumulator is going to be 0 and the Z flag is going to be set
PC 0 X 0 1
Load the accumulator from address 0 index with X so see you got a accumulator of 0 and we got Z
so now
We are going to do a BEQ to done
So we're going to jump right out of this loop because now we've hit the 0 byte in our character array
PC 0 X 0 3 branch if equal address 0 X 1 0
One more PC 0 X 1 0 break printed output. Hello
So it finished it finished and look it printed out an uppercase version of the word
Hello, so I recommend that you go in and you play with this and you load this and you control the reset the narrate the stepping
You kind of see how I'm doing it
I'll tell you I know what I'm doing and it's really hard to read these things and that's why I kind of think of
This from an assembly language perspective. I'm trying to figure out it doesn't hurt to sort of hover over and say oh
that's the compare instruction and that is the letter a and you can hover over these things and
Learn some stuff about what each of the locations is
So this is a nice little bit of code that is a loop with an F test. It's got increments
It's got a continue in it
And so it is you know kind of a non-trivial piece of code the smallest non-trivial piece of code that I could fit
Into this particular emulator on a screen that's small enough that maybe that you can see this on a mobile device
So I hope you found this useful
Cheers